---
title: "图论学习"
date: 2022-08-10T15:32:56+08:00
#draft: true
image: https://s2.loli.net/2022/08/10/kohwepMSim9D1xs.png
description: 基于 GTM173 | 间断更新
tag: ["笔记","图论","数学"]
categories : ["笔记","图论","数学"]

---

## The Basics <i class="far fa-sticky-note"></i>

A graph is a pair $G=(V,E)$ , $ G $ are _vertics_, and $E$ means _edges_, $E$ are 2-element subsets of $V$.


 
A vertices $v$ is  _incident_ with an edge $e$ if  $v\in e$,two vertices incident with an edge are _endvertices_ or _ends_.The set of all the edges in $E$ at a vertices $v$ is denoted by $E(v)$.

Some concept:
- graph's _order_ written as $|G|$, means the number of vertices. The number of edge denoted by $||G||$. _empty graph_ $(\emptyset,\emptyset)$ simply write $\emptyset$, A graph of order 0 or 1 is called _<font color=purple>trivial</font>_.
- _adjacent_ or _neighbours_ : vertices have an edge ; edge have an end in common
- _complete_ : all vertices of a graph are pairwise adjacent. A complete graph on $n$ vertices is  a $K^n$, example $K^3$ is a triangle(三角形).
- _independent_ : non-adjacent; for a set, if no two of its elements are adjacent.
- _<font color=red>isomorphic</font>_ ， write $G \simeq G^\prime$ (usually like write $G = G^\prime$), if two graphs exists a bijection (双射) 
  $$\varphi : V \to V^\prime \,\text{with} \,\, xy\in E \Leftrightarrow \varphi (x)\varphi(y) \in E^\prime \quad \forall x,y\in V$$

    so the map $\varphi$ called _<font color=purple>isomorphism</font>_ , if $G = G^\prime$ is _automorphism_ (自同态（形）). 
- _graph property_ : A class of graphs that is closed under isomorphism. 
- _graph invariant_ : A map which assigns equal values to isomorphic graphs.  (在同形图上不变的量，比如节点数量和边数量)

Set operation :
- Union : $G \cup G^\prime := (V\cup V^\prime,E\cup E^\prime)$, difference similarly, and if $G\cap G^\prime = \emptyset$, then they are _<font color=royalblue>disjoint</font>_. 

- _induced subgraph_ : $G \subseteq G^\prime$ and $G^\prime $ has all the edge $xy\in E$ with $x,y \in V^\prime$. write $G^\prime =: G[V^\prime]$.  (只少了点的子集，包括的点同时包括所有对应边)
- _spanning subgraph_ : $G \subseteq G^\prime$ and  $V^\prime$ spans all of $G$, i.e. if $V^\prime=V$. (点都有的子图)
- $G - U$ is $G [V\setminus U]$, $U$ is any set of vertices. Similarly, $G+F := (V,E\cup F)$. 
- $G* G^\prime$ : $G$ and $G^\prime$ is disjoint, and joining all vertices with each other. For example, $K^2 * K^3 = K^5 $.
- _complement_ : write is $\overline{G}$, $\overline{G} = G ([V]^2 \setminus E ) $
- _line graph_ : $L(G)$ of $G$ is the graph on $E$, which edges as vertices and adjacent edges as edges. (边视为顶点的新图)

### degree of a vertex

The set of neighbours of a vertex $v$ in $G$ is denoted by $N_G(v)$ or $N(v)$, for a set $U\subseteq V$, $N(U)$ means the neighbours in $V\setminus U$ for all vertices in $U$. 
The degree $d(v)$ is the number $|E(v)|$ of edges at $v$.

_isolated_ meaning a vertex degree is 0, $\delta(G)$ and $\Delta(G)$ is the minimum degree and maximum degree of $v\in V$. 

$d(G)$ is the average degree of $G$, sometimes directly express as $\varepsilon(G) := |E|/|V|$, and $\varepsilon(G) = \frac{1}{2} d(G)$.

- $k$-regular : all the vertices of $G$ have same degree $k$. _cubic_ is a 3-regular graph.


**Proposition :** The number of vertics of odd degree in a graph is always even

### Paths and cycles

A **path** is a non-empty graph $P=(V,E)$ of the form:
$$V=\{x_0,x_1,......, x_k\} \quad E=\{x_0x_1,......,x_{k-1}x_k\}$$

The number of edges of a path is its _length_, denoted by $P^k$. $P^0 = K^1$.

- A-B path : path $P = x_0...x_k$ and $V(P)\cap A=\{x_0\} \quad V(P)\cup B=\{x_k\}$
- independent paths : none of them contains an inner vertex of another.(互不包含中间节点)
- H-path : $P$ two ends in graph H

_**cycle**_ : $P = x_0...x_{k-1}$ is a path and $k\ge 3$, the graph $C^k := P + x_{k-1}x_0$.

- _girth_ $g(G)$ : The minimum length cycle of $G$ .(no cycle is zero)
- _circumference_ : The maximum length cycle of $G$.(no cycle is $\infty$)
- _chord_ : two vertices of a cycle joining a edge but not be the edges of the cycle
- _induced cycles_ : The cycle is a subgraph of other cycle
- diam $G$ : The greatest distance between any two vertices of $G$

**Proposition** : Every graph containing a cycle satisfies $g(G)\le 2 \,\text{diam} \,G + 1$

- _central_ : A vertex in $G$ its greatest distance with any other vertex is smallest. And this distance is the _radius_ of $G$, denoted by $rad G$ 

$$rad\, G \le diam \,G \le 2 \, rad \, G$$

**Corollary** : If $\delta (G) \ge 3$ then $g(G) < 2 log|G|$.

- _walk_ : If the vertices in a walk are all distinct, is a path. 
- _connected_ : any two of vertices are linked by a path in graph $G$ 
- _component_ : 图的一个最大联通子图
- _separates_ : 如果所有A-B路径都需要经过X的点或边，称X分割了A、B。 edges of X, deifnition of _bridge_. two vertics is a _cutvertex_. 



### Just Words  </i><i class="fa fa-paragraph "></i>
- nuisanse : 麻烦事
- disregard ：不理会 

<head> 
    <script defer src="https://use.fontawesome.com/releases/v5.11.0/js/all.js"></script> 
    <script defer src="https://use.fontawesome.com/releases/v5.11.0/js/v4-shims.js"></script> 
</head> 
<link rel="stylesheet" href="https://use.fontawesome.com/releases/v5.11.0/css/all.css">